feat: access revamp (#104)
web3-storage/specs: w3-access.md

  | AccessDelegate   "access/delegate"
  | AccessClaim      "access/claim"
  | AccessRequest    "access/request"
} representation inline {
  discriminantKey "can"
}
```

### Access Delegate

The `access/delegate` capability MAY be invoked by an authorized agent to send a set of delegations to their respective audiences.

#### Access Delegate Example

The following example illustrates `did:key:zAlice` invoking `access/delegate` capability with web3.storage, requesting it to send a delegation from [access example] to their audience.

```json
{
  "v": "0.9.1",
  "iss": "did:key:zAlice",
  "aud": "did:web:web3.storage",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:key:zAlice",
      "can": "access/delegate",
      "nb": {
        "delegations": { "bafy...prf1": { "/": "bafy...prf1" } }
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "exp": 1705622469,
   "s": {"/": {"bytes": "7aED...A0"}},
}
```

##### Delegate IPLD Schema

```ipldsch
type AccessDelegate struct {
  with AgentDID
  nb Delegate
}

type Delegate struct {
  delegations { String: &UCAN }
}

type AgentDID = string
```

##### Delegate `with`

The `with` field MUST be set to the [`did:key`] identifying the [space] where delegations will be stored.

> An implementation MAY deny a request if tje specified [space] has no capacity to store the supplied [UCAN]s, or if the space does not have the `access/delegate` capability provisioned.

Author: ```suggestion
An implementation MAY deny a request if the specified [space] has no capacity to store the supplied [UCAN]s, or if the space does not have the `access/delegate` capability provisioned.
```

1. Issuer of the invocation.
1. [Space] where delgations will be stored

To put it differently delegation MAY be sent by anyone, it does not have to be the issuer of the delegation. Send delegation MAY be delegating capability to resource different from the [space] where sent delegation will be stored.

##### Delegate `nb.delegations`

Field MUST be set to a set of [UCAN] [IPLD Link]s represented via [IPLD Map]. Map keys SHOULD be their corresponding values encoded as strings.  It is RECOMMENDED to use base32 encoding.

Protocol intentionally does not specify how to transfer linked [UCAN]s leaving it up to the implementations to decide.

> ⁂ [w3up] implementation REQUIRES that all linked [UCAN]s be bundled with the invocation.

##### Delegate Receipt

Implementation MUST respond with [UCAN Receipt]. On success result MUST be a `Unit` (empty [IPLD Map]) type.

On failure result MUST have `message` string field describing the error.

### Access Claim

The `access/claim` capability MAY be invoked by an authorized agent to receive the
capabilities that were delegated to the audience corresponding to the `with` field.

#### Access Claim Example

> Example illustrates `did:key:zBob` invoking `access/claim` capability with web3.storage requesting delegations where `did:key:zBob` is an audience like one in the [access example].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example illustrates `did:key:zBob` invoking `access/claim` capability with web3.storage requesting delegations where `did:key:zBob` is an audience like one in the [access example].
```

```json
{
  "v": "0.9.1",
  "iss": "did:key:zBob",
  "aud": "did:web:web3.storage",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:key:zBob",
      "can": "access/claim",
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "exp": 1705622469,
   "s": {"/": {"bytes": "7aED...A0"}},
}
```

#### Access Claim Schema

```ipldsch
type AccessClaim struct {
  with DID
}

type DID = string
```

#### Access Claim `with`

The `with` field MUST be set to the [DID] identifying the audience of the
delegations.

#### Access Claim Receipt

> Implementation MUST respond with [UCAN Receipt]. On success result MUST set of [UCAN] [IPLD Link]s represented via [IPLD Map] where keys SHOULD be corresponding values encoded as strings.  It is RECOMMENDED to use base32 base encoding for the keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation MUST respond with a [UCAN Receipt]. On success, the result MUST include the set of [UCAN] [IPLD Link]s represented as an [IPLD Map] where keys SHOULD be corresponding values encoded as strings.  It is RECOMMENDED to use base32 encoding for the keys.
```

> Protocol intentionally does not specify how to transfer linked [UCAN]s leaving it up to implementations to prescsribe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol intentionally does not specify how to transfer linked [UCAN]s leaving it up to implementations.
```

  "or":   Clause
  "and":  Clause
  # Predicates
  ">":    CompareClause
  "<":    CompareClause
  ">=":   CompareClause
  "<="    CompareClause
  "="     CompareClause
  "!="    CompareClause
  "like"  LikeClause
} representation keyed

type CompareClause = { Attribute: Compare }
type Compare union {
  | CompareClause       map
  | Float               float
  | Int                 int
  | String              string
  | Bytes               bytes
  | Link                link
} representation kinded

type LikeClause { Attribute: Like }
type Like union {
  | LikePattern         string
  | LikeClause          map
} representation kinded

# Similar to SQLite like pattern
# - Any except for "%" and "_" characters matches itself.
# - An underscore "_" matches any single character.
# - A percent "%" symbol matches any single character.
type LikePattern = string
```

#### Requesting Principal

The resource (`with` field) MUST be set to the [DID] of the principal requesting an authorization.

> ℹ️ It should be noted that the resource specified in the `with` field of the authorization request is NOT REQUIRED to be the same as the issuer of the request.

#### Authorizing Principal

> The [audience] (`aud` field) MUST be set to the [account] [DID] from which authorization is being requested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [audience] (`aud` field) MUST be set to the [account] [DID] from which the authorization is being requested.
```

### Access Authorize

![deprecated](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-deprecated-red.svg?style=flat-square)

> ⚠️ Has been deprecated in favor of [access request]

The `access/authorize` capability MAY be invoked by a user agent / application to get access to the required capabilities.

#### Access Authorize Example

```json
{
  "v": "0.9.1",
  "iss": "did:key:z6Mkk...xALi",
  "aud": "did:mailto:web.mail:alice",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:key:z6Mkk...xALi",
      "can": "access/request",
      "nb": {
        "iss": "did:mailto:web.mail:alice",
        "att": [{"can": "store/add"}]
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "exp": 1685602800,
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQJb...dJQ4"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Access Authorize Schema

```ipldsch
type AccessAuthorize struct {
  iss   DID
  att   [CapabilityRequest]
}

type CapabilityRequest struct {
  can   Ability
}
type Ability = string
```

#### Authorization Requesting Principal

The resource (`with` field) MUST be set to the [DID] of the principal requesting an authorization.

#### Authorization Authorizing Principal

> The [`nb.iss`] MUST be set to the [account] [DID] from which authorization is being requested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`nb.iss`] MUST be set to the [account] [DID] from which the authorization is being requested.
```

#### Authorization Level

The `nb.att` field MUST be an array of objects. Each object in `nb.att` field MUST

> have `can` field set to requested ability. All requested abilities SHOULD be for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have the `can` field set to the requested ability. All requested abilities SHOULD be for
```

the same resource [space].

## Usage Patterns

### Access across multiple devices

> Alice installs `w3up` program and runs it the first time. Program asks what email address to use for the [account]. Alice types `alice@web.mail`. Program derives `did:mailto:web.mail:alice` [DID] and requests authorization from it. Program invokes [access claim] capability and discovers that [account] has no [space] so it creates a new keypair and a corresponding space `did:key:zAliceSpace`, provisions it and after confirmation from Alice sets up space recovery by delegating full authority to Alice's [account]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alice installs the `w3up` program and runs it the first time. The program asks what email address to use for the [account]. Alice types `alice@web.mail`. The program derives a `did:mailto:web.mail:alice` [DID] and requests authorization from it. Next the program invokes an [access claim] capability and discovers that the [account] has no [space] so it creates a new keypair and a corresponding space `did:key:zAliceSpace`, provisions it and after confirmation from Alice sets up space recovery by delegating full authority to Alice's [account]:
```

      "can": "*"
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "exp": null,
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQJb...dJQ4"
    }
  }
}
```

> Program invokes [access delegate] capability with the account delegation so it can be received anywhere Alice logs in with her account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The program invokes an [access delegate] capability with the account delegation so it can be received anywhere that Alice logs in with her account.
```

      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [{ "/": "bafy...prf1" }],
  "exp": null,
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQJb...dJQ4"
    }
  }
}
```

> When Alice runs `w3up` program on her other device, and logs in to her account, program invokes [access authorize] capability to get access on this device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Alice runs the `w3up` program on her other device, and logs in to her account, the program invokes an [access authorize] capability to get access on this device.
```

```json
{
  "v": "0.9.1",
  "iss": "did:key:zAli",
  "aud": "did:web:web3.storage",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:key:zAli",
      "can": "access/authorize",
      "nb": {
        "iss": "did:mailto:web.mail:alice",
        "att": [{"can": "*"}]
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "exp": null,
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQJb...dJQ4"
    }
  }
}
```

> On invocation service sends an authorization confirmation email to `alice@web.mail`. Alice clicks a link in the email to approving requested authorization, on which service issues [attestation] proving that Alice has authorized requested authorization to `did:key:zAli` (an agent DID on new device).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the invocation is received, the service sends an authorization confirmation email to `alice@web.mail`. Alice clicks the link in the email to approve the requested authorization. The service then issues an [attestation] proving that Alice has authorized requested authorization to `did:key:zAli` (an agent DID on new device).
```

```json
{
  "v": "0.9.1",
  "iss": "did:web:web3.storage",
  "aud": "did:key:zAli",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:web:web3.storage",
      "can": "ucan/attest",
      "nb": {
        "proof": { "/": "bafy...auth" }
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "exp": null,
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQJb...dJQ4"
    }
  }
}
```

> In the background new device polled [access claim] and once request was authorized it received delegation from an account along with the [attestation] from the service proving that Alice has authorized it. This allows new device to access to the [space].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the background, the new device polled [access claim] and once the request was authorized it received the delegation from an account along with an [attestation] from the service proving that Alice has authorized it. This allows the new device to acces the [space].
```

> In the background, the new device polled [access claim] and once the request was authorized it received the delegation from an account along with an [attestation] from the service proving that Alice has authorized it. This allows the new device to acces the [space].

Author: ```suggestion
In the background, the new device polled [access claim] and once the request was authorized it received the delegation from an account along with an [attestation] from the service proving that Alice has authorized it. This allows the new device to access the [space].
```

      "can": "store/list"
    }
  ],
  "prf": [],
  "exp": 1685602800,
  "s": { "/": { "bytes": "7aEDQJb...dJQ4" } }
}
```

> And [access delegate] capability allows her to send the delegation so it could be claimed by Bob.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
...and the [access delegate] capability allows her to send the delegation so it can be claimed by Bob.
```

```json
{
  "v": "0.9.1",
  "iss": "did:key:zAliceSpace",
  "aud": "did:web:web3.storage",
  "att": [
    {
      "with": "did:key:zAliceSpace",
      "can": "access/delegate",
      "nb": {
        // Map of delegation links to be stored for their audiences.
        "delegations": { "bafy...prf1": { "/": "bafy...prf1" } }
      }
    }
  ],
  "prf": [{ "/": "bafy...prf1" }],
  "exp": 1685602800,
  "s": { "/": { "bytes": "7aEDQJb...dJQ4" } }
}
```

> When Bob runs `w3up` agent the first time and authorizes as `bob@gmail.com`, the program invokes [access claim] capability and collects all capabilities available to the account, including one sent by Alice, gaining access to her space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Bob runs the `w3up` agent the first time and authorizes as `bob@gmail.com`, the program invokes the [access claim] capability and collects all capabilities available to the account, including the one sent by Alice, gaining access to her space.
```

[`did:key`]: https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-method-key/
[UCAN]:https://github.com/ucan-wg/spec/blob/692e8aab59b763a783fe1484131c3f40d997b69a/README.md
[UCAN Receipt]:https://github.com/ucan-wg/invocation/tree/f28f682bcb484cb515785b2a268d8a5b4cfc2b58#225-receipt
[IPLD]: https://ipld.io/
[DAG-CBOR]: https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/spec/
[space]:#space
[owner]:#owner
[access]:#access
[DID]:https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/

> [DAG-JSON]:ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-json/spec

Author: ```suggestion
[DAG-JSON]:https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-json/spec
```
